[MUSIC]
>> Kyle Simpson: Enter observables.
Now, understand that Observables
are not a guarantee for JavaScript.
Right now they are implemented
in user-land libraries, and
there is a proposal for
Observables to land in the language.
At some point,
there was a strong feeling that they
might land in the ES7 time frame.
As far as I'm aware, I don't think
that's actually gonna happen in the ES7,
meaning ES2016.
Because as far as I'm aware as of today,
I think the feature cut off for
ES2016 is like next month.
So Observables are on a good path and
there's a pretty good chance we're going
to get something like this
natively in the language.
It just might not be next month.
So it might be a little bit further off.
And that means that what we're
about to learn with Observables,
we're learning based upon the semantics
of a particular library implementation.
We don't have a very good sense of exactly
what they're going to be from a native
primitive perspective,
like we did with promises.
So the caveat here is the sorts of stuff
that we're about to talk about is subject
to some flux, it's subject to some
evolution between now and the time that
some final standard lands Observables may
end up being called something different.
They might have a different looking API,
who knows, but
right now there's a pretty
good library out there for
Observables and it's called RX J.S. that's
our JavaScript library it's actually
RX is the name of the library
read reactive extensions.
It's made by the folks really
smart folks at Microsoft, and
they've ported it to like a dozen or
a couple dozen different languages.
So RXJS is the JavaScript port.
It's in C.
Sharp,
I think that's the original one, it's in
Java, it's in several other languages.
So it's nice from
the consistency perspective,
whatever language you work in there's
probably an RX library for it.
Once you learn it,
once you're gonna be able to use
it in lots of places that's good.
But to understand what an observable is,
again from a conceptual perspective,
see this is how I always teach,
I'm gonna teach you the API first,
I wanna teach you the conceptuals.
So let's talk about spreadsheets.
Everybody loves spreadsheets, right?
I just found some random
spreadsheet image on Google Images,
cuz I don't have any good
ones to take of my own.
I don't know what the spreadsheet is,
but it's pretty clear
that this spreadsheet is illustrating
the concept that I want to get across.
By the way,
this metaphor is not unique to me.
So I've heard this from others.
I just think it's a particularly
good one to start with.
And observable is kind of like a chain
of calculated fields in a spreadsheet.
So you know in spreadsheets
you can have data in a field.
But you can also have a field,
which is a calculated field.
It's calculated based upon the data
that's in some other field.
So C1 might have the number ten in it,
and C2,
right below it might be whatever
the values in there times two.
So when I type in 10, then as soon as I
hit enter, immediately this field says 20.
And I might have another field over here,
I might have D13 that says,
D13 is the calculation of
three times whatever's in C2.
So I changed this to 20, C1 becomes 20,
C2 becomes 40, and D13 becomes 120, right?
Do you see that the calculation
chain is a flow of data?
We're setting up a flow of data
from an original source location to
all these different places, where
we're doing something with that data.
We're calculating something.
We're subscribing to and
responding to that data.
That's the genesis of this
notion of reactive programming.
When we think about reactive
programming it is to say,
the source of my data some of that source.
But the data once I get that event, it's
going to go through a series of steps and
some of those steps are going to
be direct like responsive just
calculate something and
some of them might be asynchronous steps.
The calculation of the data that goes
through the spreadsheet as you change one
value, even though it
looks immediate to us.
Each step it has to update all the fields
and then update all the fields and
then update all the fields, so there
is some propagation delay if you will.
But we can think about an observable or
rather reactive programming as a way to
model a piece of data coming in one side,
that's from the producer.
The event emitter, if you will,
coming in one side, and
all the steps that it takes to
propagate its way through a system.
It's a data flow mechanism, and
data flow mechanisms are built from
the ground up to respond to events.
So if we've got a vent oriented systems,
this might be a really
good abstraction for us.
Is everybody following where
I'm coming from conceptually.
So we'll boil this down for you.
An observable is an adapter
hooked onto an event source
that produces a promise,
every time a new event comes through.
But it does so in that separate way,
where I can set up my event source.
And an entirely different part of my
location, I can declaratively say,
what's my data flow?
I don't have to conflate the two like
we're doing in those other examples,
where I put the promise
inside of the event thing.
I have an observable that represents my
data source and I can subscribe to that
observable in one or more other locations
of my system in an entirely separate way.
And it's going to magically
take care of all that
creation of promises in the bridge and
the gap for us.
So it's a way in programming to represent
what we can visually think about, or
conceptually think about
from a spreadsheet.
We can represent each one of those
different fields as a different step
in a chain of response to an observable.
So here's a quick example
of some code from our RxJS,
you'll notice that you create an
observable using Rx.Observable.fromEvent.
That's one of their many utilities they
provide and the way it's set up is,
it takes the dawn elements an event name
it automatically hooks the event name
to the dawn element and
every time one of those events fires
it pumps another piece of data through
the chain, through the observable.
So that's how we create
an observable from an event.
There's about a dozen or so
different ways to make an observable.
You can make one by
attaching it to an event.
You can make a plain old simple observable
that you manually are gonna put some data
through, you can attach it from a website,
I mean there's a lot of different
ways to make observables.
But I make an observable on line one, in
an entirely different part of my system.
I can declare what all those steps are,
what all the calculations of
the fields in my spreadsheet look like.
Basically, I make a declarative
chain of the data flow.
So every time an event comes in from the
DOM event, every time I click on a button
that's a piece of data coming in and
it's going to flow through this chain.
Now, we have utilities that
look familiar to us like map.
Map in the synchronous sense went
over a whole array of the values.
Map in the asynchronous event is just
invoked every time a new piece of data
comes along.
So you can actually think about an event
stream as a never ending array.
And we can perform the same sorts
of list operations across time
that we would do all together.
That's why it was important for
us to understand maps and reduces and
things like that.
So here, we can map over an event stream
in much the same way conceptually that we
could map over an array
that was already complete.
It's just that every time
a piece of data comes through,
we can do some sort of
transformation on it.
And here the transformation is
I'm extracting the class name
from the event object, okay.
We can filter down, we can do
perform an exclusion on our list.
And that's something interesting.
Because fundamentally, fundamentally
this list is actually asynchronous.
We can actually have steps in our
response that are asynchronous.
Distinct until changed.
It's an interesting one.
What it says is, the first time a piece
of data comes through, let it go through.
But if another one comes through the same
piece of data, don't let that go through
because I've already seen that one,
but then if something new comes along.
Let that one through.
And if I keep getting
the same one of those,
don't let any more
duplicates come through.
So let's say, I have one that
the number one comes to the system and
I got five of those, only the first one is
going to be let through in the next four
going to be ignored.
And then a two comes along.
So I'm going to let the first
two come along at any duplicates
are going to be ignored.
What happens when another one comes along?
I'm going to let a one one
more one come through and
then ignore any duplicates that's
what the until changed is.
So there's distinct which is just I only
want one ever of the thing and distinct
until changed is distinct, and then I
reset every time a new value comes in.
I reset what I'm remembering.
So you notice in this chain, not all of my
events are going to make it to line 11.
And that's totally okay, cuz we're
setting ourselves up with a data flow,
just like we would in a spreadsheet.
Subscribe is kind of like
the end of the chain.
Subscribe is how you basically have
a sort of synchronous response to
any events that are coming in.
So there's more to it than that.
But you notice that basically subscribe
is kind of like a synchronous thing.
I'm not transforming any data,
it's not really gonna show up in
the middle of my chain, probably.
It's kinda be at the end of my chain,
it's when I and
finally done with whatever the data is
through all of its transformations and
filterings I arrived at some data.
So at the end of my chain, I have
a subscribe of a piece of data that comes
in and I can console.log it out.
>> Kyle Simpson: Okay.
That's a real high level view of what
working with an observable is like.
We have to make an observable some way and
we have utilities, and
libraries that can do that for us, and
then we have to respond to observables.
And it's appropriate, I think,
some people disagree with this, but
I think it's appropriate to think
of an observable as a stream.
It's a stream of data
that's gonna come through.
It's being pumped by a set of events and
it's a stream of data that's coming
through.
>> Kyle Simpson: So
what about distinctUntilChanged,
I actually want you all to pop this up.
You have in your slides the link or
you can just type,
I love this website RxMarbles.com.
Let's all take a look at RxMarbles.com,
I just get such a kick out of this web
site.
>> Kyle Simpson: Let me quickly orient
you, go ahead and click down on
the distinctUntilChanged which is just
slightly down the list there on the left.
Click on the distinctUntilChanged.
And you'll notice that it's depicting for
us what these marbles
these little bubbles here,
kind of exactly we're talking about the
touch the stuff on the top is the input.
And there's only one stream for this.
And the stuff on the bottom is the output.
And you notice what happens,
as I start to move these marbles around.
What happens if I move this one over here,
the solid
just disappear because the sequence
meant that it was just a duplicate.
So we can move the marbles around and
see how these different
stream operations operate.
We're going to come back to RxMarbles and
look at more stream operations and
a little bit, but you can notice
that probably about the top.
I'd say maybe 30 or
40 of them are depicted here.
Rx actually has probably like 150,
maybe 200 different methods
it's a pretty big library.
All told, if you've got everything,
I think it's something like 150,
200k of JavaScript.
So it's a pretty stout library.
It takes a while to
learn all these things.
I have not found any other resource
on the web that is better at learning
than RxMarbles, I think you can probably
learn probably 50% of Observables
by doing nothing but just playing
around with the bubbles on the screen.
It's a really fantastic resource.
Okay.
Helps you visualize what's happening
with your different stream operations.
So we'll come back to
distinct until change,
I mean we'll come back to
RXmarbles here in a little bit.
I just wanted to point that out to you.